Checklist for a Better Graphical User Interface Design

Design
q Is the GUI design refined, uncluttered, and free of distracting elements?
q Does it have visual balance in terms of object placement, button groupings, and graphical elements?
q Is there a consistent approach in defining the static and dynamic areas of the user interface?
q Does all text fit within the boundaries of buttons, windows, and banners without overcrowding?
q Are objects centered where expected, aligned to each other within groups, and consistent, page to page?
q Are flashing or blinking elements used sparingly?
q Have the best practices of affordance been applied, so that buttons are easily discernible from labels?

Color Use and Appropriateness
q Are the chosen colors aesthetically pleasing and suitable for the application?
q Is the color scheme used consistently throughout all the pages of the interface?
q Have the design and colors met the needs of users with visual impairment or color blindness?
q Is color used only to enhance functions, and not used as the sole way to convey information?

Accuracy
q Do the symbols and icons used on buttons easily identify and appropriately reflect the button function?
q Do the buttons work as would be expected?
q Does button feedback correctly indicate when a button is pressed, or the function state?
q Are all the buttons, labels, and headings labelled correctly?
q Is the correct case and capitalization used for all button, label, and heading text?
q Is the spelling of all static text words correct, and are abbreviations used only where space is limited?
q Are any label names used more than once on the same page?
q Do all pop-up and modal pop-up windows operate correctly without leaving the main page?

Operation and Performance
q Is it easy to turn on and turn off the system?
q Is the navigation approach suitable for the intended application?
q Is visual and aural feedback present where and when expected, and is that feedback consistent?
q Is the interface easy to navigate and understand without much training?
q Does it take three steps or fewer to accomplish critical functions and tasks?
q Are there clearly understood confirmation prompts where appropriate?
q Is the grouping of function buttons consistent among devices with similar controls?