Conclusion

This guide was written to enable interface designers to create intuitive, functional, and well-designed graphical user
interfaces for touchpanels for AV control systems.

Within this guide are the design fundamentals and considerations that are essential to a successful user interface
design for every AV system control application.

Summary of the key concepts:

Consistency — Maintaining consistency (using fonts, shapes, placement, sizes, and colors) in the interface allows
the easy recognition and location of each component of the system.

Affordance awareness — Affordance is the visual cue to the function of an object. If an image is intended to be a
button that can be pushed, make it look like one. If it is not, then avoid making it look like one (false affordance).

Static and dynamic areas — Logical use of static (unchanging) and dynamic (variable content) areas provides
constant access to commonly-used functions, and the ability to use controls specific to a selectable source or
operation.

Navigation and pages — Start with clear entry points. Use uncomplicated navigation to get the user to where they
want to be without leaving the main page and without introducing page flips. Use pop-up and modal pop-up pages
wisely but sparingly.

Button design — Button size and shape, aspect ratio and orientation, spacing and chunking, labels and icons, are all
important when creating controls for the interface. Giving visual feedback when performing the necessary actions also
enhances the user experience.

Clutter and color — Avoid clutter. Too many options on a page are a distraction. Keep it as simple as possible.
Use colors that “work”; start with analogous, harmonious colors and avoid using clashing colors (red and green for
example). Be mindful of users who may have visual impairments.
Text and font styles — Never use serif fonts or italic styles, and avoid text effects (for example embossing,
underlines, outlines).

Backgrounds — Avoid backgrounds that visually compete with buttons or labels. Use solid, cool or neutral colors, or
muted textures or images.

Customer focus — Be mindful of the needs and expectations of the end user. Provide a well-conceived,
recognizable layout that presents the user with everything necessary and easily accessible to operate the AV system.