Introduction

The control system touchpanel interface is perhaps the most highly visible component of an installed AV system, and
may be the only AV hardware with which a user has direct interaction. The quality of the entire AV system is often
judged by the experience the user has with the touchpanel.

Quality user interfaces balance style and function, with the emphasis on function, though aesthetics are important.
A layout that is familiar and pleasing to the eye is more likely to be used. An interface must meet the needs of the
user and function the way they expect. Operating a poorly or overly designed interface can be intimidating and
overwhelming, so eliminating confusion is the key element to a successful design.

With limitless color options, graphics, and logos available to the designer, a touchpanel interface can be infinitely
customized. The challenge for the designer is not to be overly creative, but to design a professional looking interface
that is easy to navigate. Fortunately, there are a number of concepts that allow designers to make educated choices
when creating an interface that is both functional and attractive.

This guide defines and explains those fundamental concepts within the context of AV control systems. The aim is to
enable touchpanel layout designers to choose with confidence the right tools and methods necessary to create an
intuitive interface that gives the user a positive experience.

The Extron Graphical User Interface Design Guide contains three main chapters:
1. Layout Principles
This chapter teaches the theories of consistency, navigation, screen layout, affordance, and color selection. A solid
understanding of these theoretical building blocks is essential for touchpanel interface designers.

2. Design Fundamentals
This chapter teaches the designer how to apply the layout principles when creating different aspects of user
interfaces, such as pages, buttons, text, fonts and images.

3. Layout Standards
This chapter shows the Extron standards for design consistency. The theory behind this chapter is to create a
baseline for consistent layouts to be used when designing interfaces for environmental controls and other common
AV devices.

NOTE: This document relies heavily on the use of color images to emphasize its content. To see the colors and the touchpanel details as they
were originally intended, it is strongly recommended that you view and use this document on-screen in its PDF format.