Resources

Perhaps the single most important contributing factor to the successful graphical user interface design and integration
is knowledge. Systems designers and integrators are encouraged to seek out training, seminars, technical articles,
white papers, and other publications from industry organizations and trusted manufacturers. See the reference
material and links below for additional graphical user interface design resources.

Books
Cooper, A., Reimann, R., and Cronin, D. (2014). About Face: The Essentials of Interaction Design.
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
Krug, S. (2014). Don't Make Me Think, Revisited: A Common Sense Approach to Web Usability. New Riders.
Mullet, K. and Sano D. (1994). Designing Visual Interfaces: Communication Oriented Techniques. Prentice Hall.
Norman, D. (1988, 2002). The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books.
Tidwell, J. (2005). Designing Interfaces: Patterns for Effective Interaction Design. O’Reilly.
Whelan, Bride M. (1994). Color Harmony 2: A Guide to Creative Color Combinations. Rockport Publishers.
Wigdor, D. and Wixon, D. (2011). Brave NUI World: Designing Natural User Interfaces for Touch and Gesture. Morgan
Kaufmann.

Color Palette Resources
websitetips.com/colortools/sitepro/
www.gimp.org/
msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb263947(VS.85).aspx
www.colorschemedesigner.com
www.colorblender.com/
thelogocompany.net/logo-color-choices.htm
www.degraeve.com/color-palette/
www.colorschemer.com/online.html
webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/

Theory
www.joelonsoftware.com/uibook/chapters/fog0000000060.html
www.namahn.com/resources/documents/note-IM.pdf
www.nngroup.com/

Extron Resources
TouchLink Pro Touchpanels
Extron TouchLink Pro touchpanels are fully-customizable touchpanels available in a variety of sizes and mounting
options to accommodate a broad range of applications. Visit www.extron.com/touchlink for more information.
TouchLink Design Themes

TouchLink design themes include templates and resource kits. Templates are ready to use graphical user interfaces
carefully matched to the most common AV applications. Resource kits are available to create a customized graphical
user interface from scratch, with all the backgrounds, icons, buttons, and sounds included. For more information on
TouchLink design themes, the templates and resource kits, visit www.extron.com/guiresources.

Reference Guide to Design Themes
The reference guide provides valuable information on Extron ready-to-use design templates and resource kits for
TouchLink touchpanels. For more information on this guide visit www.extron.com/guiresources.

Training Website
The Extron training website at www.extron.com/training is the central resource for education and certification
information. Here you will find program descriptions, course schedules by location, support material, and
administrative information such as transcript verification.

Below is a list of some of the programs offered:
• Extron Control Specialist Certification
• Extron Control Professional Certification
• Extron Institutes for instructor-led courses
• Customized on-site training for instruction at your facility
• E-Training On Demand for online training

Extron S3 Control Systems Support Hotline
For direct access to “top tier” support for configurable control systems, call the S3 Control Systems Support Hotline
at 1.800.633.9877. Our large group of dedicated applications engineers stands ready to answer all your control
system questions and help you with system design, technical troubleshooting, configuration assistance, remote
product or system diagnostics, repair/advance replacement services, and general product support.